Here's another thing that you can do,
some really cool stuff with.
There's a DOM API called Active Element,
and
Active Element will return
the currently focused element.
So in our example up here, where we
have this let's button focused, right?
It's got the blue focus ring around it.
If I were to open my Chrome DevTools and
do document.activeelement,
we would see that this button with the
let's it is the currently focused item.
So what is that used for?
One example where I've used it in the past
is when you have a page transition,
and it's important that when you go
back from that page transition that you
return the user to wherever they were.
So thinking about a social
network like Twitter,
which has a big list of tweets
that you can cycle through, and
then when you click on a tweet, it brings
you into a modal of the tweet itself.
When you close that modal, users are going
to expect to be returned to the tweet that
they were focused on, right?
They're not gonna expect to be sent
back to the homepage at the top,
which would be the default behavior
if you just close the modal.
So for example, on social networks,
what they'll do is when the modal button
gets clicked, it's about to be opened,
they'll cache the active element and a
variable, and then let you open the modal.
And then in the modal close event, they'll
call.focus on that cached variable, so
that when the close happens,
they call.focus.
Which will not only give the focus ring,
it'll put you in the tab index of where
you belong, and
it will also move the screen if necessary.
So if I call focus on this when I'm
scrolled up, it'll refocus on that.
So that one's pretty helpful.
Again, single page apps where you
expect the back button to work, right?
Especially anything with an infinite feed,
you can imagine if you're scrolling
Instagram for 20 minutes, and
then it just shoots you to the top and
you've lost your place.
And you have to look at
puppies all over again.
It could be terrible.
So, this is one that's pretty useful.
Again, it's simple as just
storing the element and
then calling .focus on it later.
This is the last kind of advanced
technique that we're gonna talk about.
And we'll just build through it together
instead of doing it as an exercise cuz
it's a little JavaScript heavy.
But tab trapping, so
the concept here being like imagine that
you have a button that makes a modal.
And let's just say as an example,
it's like a login screen or
something like that.
So you click on the button and
a modal opens up, and
the modal has a form to fill in or
something like that.
So as a keyboard only user, if I keep
tabbing through to kind of see what's
going on it'll tab me to the index or
to the input, and the other input and
the Submit button.
They keep tabbing what's happening to
this button, again to this button, but
if I hit Tab again, you can see it
focuses me all the way back out here.
And if I keep tabbing it's actually
gonna start focusing on the web page in
the background.
Again, keeping in mind that while for
all intents and purposes,
it looks like the screen is blacked out.
That's just CSS doing that,
like the page is still open.
And so what can happen here is that
keyboard only users can very easily get
themselves totally out of the modal.
And if they don't have vision,
then they don't even have any
indication that they've left the modal.
So they're like kind of browsing the
website when the modal is the only thing
interactable.
So the idea with tab trapping is
a JavaScript technique where you grab
the first tab-able element in a modal.
And you grab the last tab-able
element in a modal, and
then you listen for like a key down event.
And if they're on the last element hitting
tab, you focus them on the first element.
And if they're on the first
element hitting Shift+Tab,
then you focus them on the last element.
And so basically you're kind of using
a lot of those techniques that we learned
like storing active elements,
calling .focus on them,
listening to keydown events.
We're sort of using all of those
together to create this experience of
really being on a modal.
So the keyboard only users feel the same
way that non-keyboard only users feel.
Does that make sense at a high level,
like tab trapping,
keeping users kind of locked into this
modal or trapped into this modal?
Great.
So yeah, so for an example here,
the modal that I'm using,
let me see, focus management.
So, I just went online,
I found some modal library.
It's not my recommendation,
it's just a library I found called Tingle.
It creates this modal, so it sets
the content to a big string here of HTML,
and then it adds these footer buttons.
This is just their demo,
right off their website, basically.
So then I have a button here for
those that do a lot of JS development,
is just get element by ID, the button.
So when the button is clicked,
we call modal.open.
And so what we'll want to do here
is we'll want to basically grab
the first element which
I can see is this input.
And we'll wanna grab the last element
which is this footer button here
which again,
if we go back over to the website.
The first element should be first name,
and
the last element should
be dangerous action.
And then we'll wanna put our
listener in basically, right?
So, I went ahead and did it, and
I just kinda wanna work through the code
together on it, just so we can see again.
Learning like the JavaScript technique
is not really the important thing,
I just want people to be
comfortable with the concept.
So, what I did here is I
hard-coded two things.
So I hard-coded the class of first on this
one, and the class of last on this one.
A better way to do it would be to use that
focusable library that I showed that has
a big string.
And then you could do document query
selector all, that focusable string,
which will give you an array
of focusable items.
And then you could access the zeros and
the length to get the first and
last on that array.
That would be very dynamic, so if people
added more things to the modal or
took away things, they would always work.
But for this kind of short example
I just manually added a class, hey,
this is the first element.
Hey, this is the last element.
And then I grabbed both of
those into variables here.
So we've got the first element is the one
with the class of first, last element,
class of last.
And then really all I did here is
that a single event listener for
the key down event.
And we just look and say, hey, if the key
hit was tab, or the key code of tab,
then we go into this if, we say if word
shifting, meaning we're moving backward.
And the currently active element
is the first element, so for
on the first element
trying to go backward.
Then we take the last element,
we call focus on it.
Otherwise, so we're not shifting,
we're going forward.
If the current active element is the last
element, meaning we're at the end trying
to go further, then we call focus on
the first element and prevent default.
So again, it gets a little bit messy,
a lot of modals will do this for
you if you're using bootstrap or
some other JavaScript library.
But I did kind of wanna give folks
a chance to understand the concept, and
then just see some of the code for
a simple implementation of it.
So yeah, so we can kind of see this,
I have one thing I like about tab trapping
is that it basically combines everything
that we've been talking about so far.
So, it's like listening
to certain key codes.
It involves active element.
It involves calling .focus,
all sorts of things like that.
Again, I would recommend if you're doing
this in production to not hard-code
the first and last classes, but just
grab a list of all queryable elements.
But yeah, other than that,
that's pretty straightforward.
>> I was just gonna ask about
the conditional with key code nine.
>> Yeah, that's a good call.
That's just a browser discrepancy.
So some browsers will send the key and
some will only send the key code.
So I think I have a feeling that
I think key code might be safe
across all browsers.
But for this example I just wanted to,
and no matter what we have,
it's either key code or a key.
Those are both equivalent to tab
nine is the key code for tab.
So yeah, I think this works pretty well.
So if we go ahead and we save it, and
we go back to my example here, and
refresh the page.
Now when I click on the tab trapping,
and I start shifting or tabbing through,
when I get to,
I know it's a little hard to see.
So, the focus ring is on dangerous action.
I hit tab again, and it brings me to first
name instead of going up to the browser.
And if I Shift+Tab,
it takes me back to dangerous action.
So, like if I was holding tab on it, I
just stay on the modal for all intents and
purposes, I'm completely
constrained to it.
I thought I'm just having now is that,
it might be nice to also add this
X here as a tab-able button.
If I had been thinking a little bit more,
so folks can know to close the modal.
Although another thing to keep in mind,
and we talked earlier that a lot of
users expect J and K to do next item,
previous item is just sort of standard.
Similarly, a lot of users expect
the Escape key to close any modal.
And so that's like another
thing that I do a lot at work.
I see modals that the Escape
key doesn't close.
Those are really hard to close,
I mean, the only two ways that
keyboard only user has to close a modal
is if they're able to tab to the X.
And if not,
being able to hit escape to close it, so
escape to close is really important.
Again, most design systems will take
care of all that stuff for you.